What Happens When Duplicate IPs Are Configured in a Network?
When two or more devices in a network are assigned the same IP address, it leads to IP address conflicts, causing network disruptions. Here's what happens in different scenarios:

	1. Symptoms of Duplicate IP Address Conflicts
		Intermittent or Lost Connectivity: Devices may lose network access or experience frequent disconnections.
		Packet Loss & Network Errors: Packets may be misrouted, causing delays or failures in communication.
		System Logs & Warnings: Devices may log ARP conflicts or display duplicate IP warnings.
		Network Instability: If critical devices (like routers or servers) have duplicate IPs, entire segments of the network can become unstable.
	2. How Networks Detect Duplicate IPs
		ARP Conflicts (Address Resolution Protocol)
		When a device wants to communicate, it sends an ARP request to resolve the MAC address of the destination IP.
		If two devices respond with the same IP but different MAC addresses, an ARP conflict occurs.
		DHCP Conflict Detection (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol)
		Before assigning an IP, DHCP servers may send a ping to check if an IP is already in use. If a response is received, the server marks the IP 		as conflicted and does not assign it.
		Operating System Notifications
		
		Windows: "There is an IP address conflict with another system on the network."
		Linux/macOS: Logs duplicate IP conflicts in system logs (dmesg, syslog).
	3. What Happens in Different Network Setups?
		(A) In a Wired Network (Ethernet)
			Packets may go to the wrong device as MAC addresses compete for traffic.
			Switches and routers may get confused, leading to unpredictable behavior.
		(B) In a Wireless Network (Wi-Fi)
			The device may lose connection as the access point (AP) cannot determine which device to send packets to.
			Wi-Fi networks with duplicate IPs may cause authentication failures.
		(C) With a Router and a Static IP Conflict
			If a static IP is assigned that overlaps with a DHCP-assigned IP, both devices may lose connectivity.
		(D) In Cloud or Virtualized Networks
			Virtual Machines (VMs) may fail to communicate if assigned duplicate IPs.
			Cloud services might automatically isolate the conflicted instances.
	4. How to Resolve IP Conflicts
		Check ARP Table:
			
			arp -a

		Look for multiple MAC addresses associated with the same IP.
		Release & Renew IP (If Using DHCP)
			
			ipconfig /release && ipconfig /renew   # Windows
			dhclient -r && dhclient                # Linux/macOS
			Find Conflicted Devices

			Linux/macOS: ping <IP> and arp -a	
			Windows: nbtstat -A <IP> to find the device name

		Manually Assign Static IPs Carefully
		Ensure static IPs are outside the DHCP range
		Check Router Logs: Most modern routers log duplicate IP conflicts.

	5. How to Prevent Duplicate IP Conflicts?
		Use DHCP Reservation to ensure devices get assigned unique IPs.
		Set a proper static IP range outside DHCP-assigned addresses.
		Enable IP Conflict Detection (supported on many managed switches and DHCP servers).
		Regularly scan the network using tools like:

			nmap -sn 192.168.1.0/24

		Implement ARP Inspection on enterprise networks.

Conclusion
Duplicate IPs create serious network disruptions, causing devices to lose connectivity or receive incorrect packets. Proper network planning, DHCP configuration, and monitoring tools can prevent such conflicts and ensure smooth operations. 

